Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Of all the themes handled by science fiction authors, that of alien contact has been one of the most consistently popular and fascinating.
For a good reason, too.
Aliens, whether they be the hostile bug-eyed monsters of the old pulp magazines or the friendly creatures of close encounters of the third kind, have always been one of the biggest attractions of science fiction.
In the past, stories of alien contact were usually written as thrillers, with the sole and simple intention of scaring readers.
H.G.
Wells' The War of the Worlds is probably the best example of that type of story.
But that's changed.
Many contemporary writers have provided more thoughtful treatments of aliens, deepening the realism and the significance of narratives of alien contact.
Of course, before you can have a story of alien contact, you have to have some aliens.
One of the most provocative descriptions of aliens in all of science fiction is found in Larry Niven's and Jerry Pournelle's The Mote in God's Eye.
The success of that book is largely due to the unique and ingenious aliens, the Moties, that Niven created for the story.
It's interesting, though, that Niven says he doesn't really create aliens for a story, but suggests that it's the other way around.
I always design alien stuff.
There are two particularly fascinating things that Niven incorporated into these modis.
One is the fact that they are not symmetrical.
They have a head, torso, legs, and arms, as humans do.
But the arms are disproportionate.
One is small and thin, the other is large and powerful.
Right.
Niven says he took that idea from studying the structures of living creatures on Earth.
In that case, I had the idea that I was following a progression with a protozoan, with an amoeba.
You get radio symmetry inside and out.
Move up a goodly distance and you find starfishes with radial symmetry on the outside and bilateral symmetry on the inside.
Move up a little further, you find flatworms and worms of all stents.
At the level of bilateral symmetry inside and out, go as far as a human and you find bilateral symmetry on the outside and no symmetry, well...
Half symmetrical on the inside.
The lungs look symmetrical.
The kidneys look symmetrical.
The intestines look like somebody dropped a plate of spaghetti.
I tried to move on to the next step.
Bilaterally unsymmetrical on the outside.
And I got the original motive, which was the engineer for me.
The other ingenious idea Niven developed for the Modis is the way they construct and use machines.
They're highly skilled tool users, but they have no standard pre-manufactured machines, parts, or tools.
They simply alter or reshape whatever they find around them at the time to suit their needs.
Niven says that particular idea just came to him.
It seemed interesting and even logical.
I was just playing with ideas at that point, and that one seemed like a fun one.
It also seemed likely enough if you've got a critter with not much intelligence except in the direction of tool making and tool altering, then why not?
The thing has to keep testing its ability or it will lose it.
It might as well be designing
something every time it needs a specific machine.
Besides the ingenuity Niven demonstrated in creating the Moties, he and Pournelle also weave some unexpected twists into the First Contact theme.
A reader interested in aliens, or more specifically in First Contact, can't afford to overlook the Mote in God's Eye.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
The so-called new wave in science fiction, which began in the mid-60s, was simply a new way of writing traditional science fiction.
There were changes, for instance, in style, and characterization was given more emphasis.
And the new wave treated themes, such as sex and religion, that science fiction hadn't really touched before.
In general, the New Wave changed the stereotyped science fiction formulas that had been around since the pulp days of the 20s, 30s, and 40s.
Frederick Pohl, who's been an author, an editor, and an agent in the field of science fiction, has something to say about that change.
The New Wave was an attempt, I guess, 15 years ago or more, of a number of writers to break away from the traditional kinds of science fiction.
In fact, most of them didn't want to call it science fiction anymore.
They wanted to call it speculative fiction or...
at nothing at all.
And they were interested primarily in writing about inner space rather than outer space, and secondarily a lot of them in things like the drug culture and rock music and so on.
But in the rather bitter internal struggle that went on in science fiction, a lot of people taking sides one way or the other.
I think everyone was deeply affected.
But we need to remember here that the New Wave wasn't really a planned and deliberate movement by a unified group of writers.
One of the principal proponents of the New Wave, author Norman Spinrad, believes it was just a bunch of diverse writers doing their own thing.
There was an old wave, but there was never, as a coherent philosophy in the school of science fiction, but there was never a New Wave in the same sense.
There were a lot of waves.
There were a lot of different people doing a lot of different things.
The people that were identified as the New Wave were very diverse.
what I was actually writing.
It's very different to say what Tom Dish was writing or Ballard or Zelazny and Delaney were also identified as new wave writers.
This stuff is much more, you know, Zelazny and Delaney and myself and Ballard and all this and Mike, we were all, there were more differences between our work than between our work taking its totality and the old stuff.
There was more difference within the so-called new wave than there was within the so-called old wave.
But Spinrad also thinks the new wave was tightly connected to what was happening in society.
And, of course, this mirrored the cultural climate at the time.
It mirrored what was happening politically.
It mirrored what was happening in music.
It mirrored what was happening in movies.
It was a phenomenon that went through the Western civilization as a whole.
There are those who say the new wave is dead.
Five-time Hugo winner Larry Nivens says so, for instance, and offers a reason for his passing.
The new wave is a very persuasive thing and very easy to use to justify bad stories.
I think that's what killed it.
Not that increased characterization and experiments with typography and story format
are a bad thing in themselves, but it's so easy to use the new wave to justify a bad story.
It was bound to collapse.
The influence of the new wave is still around, though.
It's left its mark on the field.
Science fiction has been broadened, maybe enhanced somehow because of it.
Frederik Pohl states it well.
The New Wave, if nothing else, taught a bunch of old dinosaurs like Azimov and Heinlein and me that there were non-traditional ways of constructing a novel.
You see, most of us had grown up when science fiction was in the pulp magazines, and most of it was written according to some variant of a pulp formula.
Well, it turned out that wasn't necessary, and I think the New Wave is responsible for teaching us that.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane.
The award-winning novel Ringworld is probably Larry Niven's finest work.
The Ringworld is an immense ring, large enough to hold three million Earths, and with a thousand-mile high wall to hold in its atmosphere.
It also has continents and oceans.
The Ringworld contains trillions of inhabitants of different species and derives energy from the sun at its center.
Niven recalls where he obtained the idea for such a fantastic structure.
I ran across the concept Dyson sphere.
Dyson, the mathematician, came up with the concept Dyson shell, and he was misunderstood to some extent, so presently I ran across an article about Dyson spheres.
Picture that as a golf ball 93 million miles in radius with a sun at the center, and
gravity generators all around the outside so you would live on the inside terraform it with oceans and soil and air I ran across that and I didn't like it I thought it could be improved and I wound up with the Ringworld
Readers studied the science behind the Ringworld and wrote Niven about seeming inconsistencies in the design of the immense artifact.
Call them errors and elaborations because some of them don't really fit the error thing.
It's just something that hadn't gotten into the original book.
One of the errors was spotted by some MIT students.
It had to do with the instability of the Ringworld.
I suspected the Ringworld was unstable, and I suspected you'd eat at it, Jed.
I...
was sure that the Ringworld was spinning fast enough to permit bizarre dramjets to be used as attitude jets, which means you don't have a fuel problem at all.
You're burning the solar wind.
But rapidly, some MIT people demonstrated that the Ringworld was unstable, and they were chanting it in the halls at the next world gone.
The Ringworld is unstable.
It still took about seven years for anyone to figure out the exact numbers for the instability.
And they are horrifying.
The Ringworld, a major solar flare would have the Ringworld grinding against its sun in five years.
Well, I worked it into the plot.
That was one elaboration or error.
Even teenage readers analyzed his Ringworld with a critical scientific eye.
A high school class in Florida got to work on the Ringworld, and their conclusion was that the Ringworld's worst problem is that all the topsoil would wind up in the oceans in about 3,000 years.
There are no earthquakes on the Ringworld, no mountain-building forces.
But in a sequel, Ringworld Engineers, Niven attempted to correct such deficiencies.
He devised a way to answer the criticism of the Florida high schoolers.
Okay, that's a tough one.
I set up a spill pipe system that runs the top, that runs the sea bottom muck from the sea bottoms under the Ringworld and up over the edge of the rim wall.
That even allows you some...
some mind's accumulation of useful metals.
Fan response of that sort caused Ringworld engineers to be written, and although Niven once said he wouldn't write anymore in the known space series, the body of stories to which Ringworld belongs, he's not so sure anymore.
I've given up saying that the known space series is dead.
There's just no point in it.
I've written five books worth of known space stories since I said that.
More on Larry Niven tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
Larry Niven is one of the best-selling authors in the field of science fiction.
A fairly large portion of his work falls into the known space series, a group of stories and novels with a consistent chronology.
Such a series is called a future history.
Niven believes there are some peculiar attractions a future history has for a science fiction author.
There had been future histories around.
Poul Anderson's and Robert Heinlein.
And I tell you, I guess we each evolve the idea somewhat independently.
And the idea is that if you carved out a consistent, workable future, it seems a shame to waste it on one story.
You put in the background because you want the background of a story to seem
bigger than it is.
So there are things that are simply unexplained.
And if you think of more to say on a given subject, why you go with it.
And if you think of a story that fits into the background of a previous story and allows you to elaborate on that background, sometimes you fall in love with the background.
And presently, you've got a bunch of stories that link.
Niven has also written some best-selling books that fall outside his known space series.
Three of these, The Mote in God's Eye, Lucifer's Hammer, and Oath of Fealty, were written in collaboration with Jerry Pournelle.
We asked Niven how he and Purnell collaborate.
Hard sometimes, but it always resolves.
The question is who is most qualified to write a given scene that we have both decided needs writing.
Before we start, we have the novel all laid out.
we know what's going in virtually everywhere.
And if we don't, it feels like we do.
And if we find out we don't, we elaborate as we get to that section.
Okay, the next question is, who is qualified to write a given scene?
Sometimes it's obvious.
If we're dealing with a madman, he's mine.
If we're dealing with military operations, it's Jerry's.
Aliens are generally mine.
Politics is generally Jerry's.
knowledge of history generally Jerry's and a real evil son of a bitch Jerry usually creates him and I usually run with him afterward Niven occasionally writes science fiction humor a rarity he talks about his most successful piece of humor I suppose I could name
Oh, Man of Steel, Woman of Kleenex, which has gotten me the most laughs, I suppose.
Everybody seems to have read it, and those who haven't have heard about it at a cocktail party.
Niven's ready eye for humor can also be appreciated, as he reveals that he's detected one of his own alien creations from Ringworld, a Pearson's puppeteer, here on Earth.
I have reason to suspect that there are puppeteers on Earth.
Look at their characteristics.
Forget the shape.
They must be masters of biology to hide that peculiar three-legged, two-headed shape.
But consider their characteristics.
They are cowards.
That is, they want everything utterly safe.
No corners on anything.
Everything is soft surfaces around the puppeteer world.
They don't even keep their world near a sun, regarding it as a runaway fusion reactor, which, of course, it is.
So, desperate regard for safety, plus an urge to meddle in the lifestyles of other species.
Driving urge to meddle with practically no restraints attached.
What does that remind you of?
It seems nearly certain to me that Ralph Nader is a Pearson Spoke McKeer.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Ever since Hugo Gernsback published the first science fiction magazine in 1926, Amazing Stories, science fiction has been separated from other kinds of literature.
And many people, both fans and authors, have been satisfied with that separation.
They like the special feeling of belonging to something distinct and even unique.
But others feel that the separation of science fiction from general literature, sometimes referred to as mainstream literature, is artificial and even harms science fiction because it keeps it a second-class genre that's not treated seriously.
We spoke with Dr. Kirpal Singh, science fiction scholar and critic, at the 1981 World Science Fiction Convention in Denver on this subject.
Dr. Singh teaches science fiction at the National University of Singapore.
He has some strong ideas on science fiction and its relationship to mainstream literature.
I think ultimately the distinctions ought to disappear, frankly.
Because the more we try to erect these boundaries, the more we get into troubled waters.
Because as we all know, categories are by their very nature exclusive.
And when they become too exclusive, as I think the case has been with science fiction for a long time, what develops is the hiatus.
and that could lead to a breakdown in communication.
rather than an integration.
And I think one of the reasons why perhaps science fiction has not quite enjoyed the kind of status that it ought to as a valid and viable form of literature in our time is the fact that too often and by too many people it has been very zealously and jealously guarded as something exclusive, something that one entered with a great deal of trepidation, things like that.
Yes, I think ultimately there has to be an elimination of the categories.
As Brian Aldiss says, science fiction is literature.
Some of Dr. Singh's ideas on why science fiction has been kept separate are probably a bit controversial.
We asked him, for instance, if readers or fans of science fiction are partly responsible for its isolation.
Yes, I think fans to a large extent explain the exclusiveness as we are witnessing in this whole convention here in Denver itself.
One of the things that I notice most readily is the fact that a lot of the fans are not really, I think, very keen on a serious discussion of science fiction.
They're here to have a good time, and that's a very good thing in itself.
I mean, I think people ought to have a good time.
But at the same time, they mustn't then go on and complain that, oh, you know, we are regarded as freaks, as people on our own individual trips.
Because I think in some ways, we SF enthusiasts invite that kind of charge or accusation.
I also feel that a lot of the science fiction writers are themselves responsible for this.
I've talked personally with a number of them and I've heard many of them speaking and I've read what they have said in fanzines and things.
They do want to keep this kind of thing going because the science fiction writers feel that they are commercially viable only in so far as they have got a large fan following.
And if they have a large fan following, then they feel that they can sell.
Now, the same writers also lament the fact that serious critics at the universities, in colleges and all, are not taking them seriously.
But I want to question that because to a large extent, I think it's part of their own making.
And they don't put enough effort and serious struggle into the work.
And therefore, the outcome of it is quite mediocre, to say the least.
Does he think science fiction should change?
Yes, I mean, you know, and this is why so much of science fiction becomes obsolete.
There's too much attention, too much ostentatious attention paid to scientific detail, scientific accuracy, new technological breakthroughs and things, so that the imagination, I think, is sapped up by the facts rather than fiction.
So that what happens in science fiction is that science takes over the fiction.
And to be established as literature, I think it's the fiction that needs to prevail.
Controversial ideas, certainly, but also thought-provoking ones.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.